docs/abc.rst, before:

.. _aiohttp-abc:

Abstract Base Classes
=====================

.. module:: aiohttp.abc

Abstract routing
----------------

aiohttp has abstract classes for managing web interfaces.

The most part of :mod:`aiohttp.web` is not intended to be inherited
but few of them are.

aiohttp.web is built on top of few concepts: *application*, *router*,
*request* and *response*.

*router* is a *pluggable* part: a library user may build a *router*
from scratch, all other parts should work with new router seamlessly.

:class:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractRouter` has the only mandatory method:
:meth:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractRouter.resolve` coroutine. It must return an
:class:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo` instance.

If the requested URL handler is found
:meth:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo.handler` is a :term:`web-handler` for
requested URL and :attr:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo.http_exception` is ``None``.

Otherwise :attr:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo.http_exception` is an instance of
:exc:`~aiohttp.web.HTTPException` like *404: NotFound* or *405: Method
Not Allowed*. :meth:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo.handler` raises
:attr:`~aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo.http_exception` on call.


.. class:: AbstractRouter

   Abstract router, :class:`aiohttp.web.Application` accepts it as
   *router* parameter and returns as
   :attr:`aiohttp.web.Application.router`.

   .. method:: resolve(request)
      :async:

      Performs URL resolving. It's an abstract method, should be
      overridden in *router* implementation.

      :param request: :class:`aiohttp.web.Request` instance for
                      resolving, the request has
                      :attr:`aiohttp.web.Request.match_info` equals to
                      ``None`` at resolving stage.

      :return: :class:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo` instance.


.. class:: AbstractMatchInfo

   Abstract *match info*, returned by :meth:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractRouter.resolve` call.

   .. attribute:: http_exception

      :exc:`aiohttp.web.HTTPException` if no match was found, ``None``
      otherwise.

   .. method:: handler(request)
      :async:

      Abstract method performing :term:`web-handler` processing.

      :param request: :class:`aiohttp.web.Request` instance for
                      resolving, the request has
                      :attr:`aiohttp.web.Request.match_info` equals to
                      ``None`` at resolving stage.
      :return: :class:`aiohttp.web.StreamResponse` or descendants.

      :raise: :class:`aiohttp.web.HTTPException` on error

   .. method:: expect_handler(request)
      :async:

      Abstract method for handling *100-continue* processing.


Abstract Class Based Views
--------------------------

For *class based view* support aiohttp has abstract
:class:`AbstractView` class which is *awaitable* (may be uses like
``await Cls()`` or ``yield from Cls()`` and has a *request* as an
attribute.

.. class:: AbstractView

   An abstract class, base for all *class based views* implementations.

   Methods ``__iter__`` and ``__await__`` should be overridden.

   .. attribute:: request

      :class:`aiohttp.web.Request` instance for performing the request.


Abstract Cookie Jar
-------------------

.. class:: AbstractCookieJar

   The cookie jar instance is available as :attr:`aiohttp.ClientSession.cookie_jar`.

   The jar contains :class:`~http.cookies.Morsel` items for storing
   internal cookie data.

   API provides a count of saved cookies::

       len(session.cookie_jar)

   These cookies may be iterated over::

       for cookie in session.cookie_jar:
           print(cookie.key)
           print(cookie["domain"])

   An abstract class for cookie storage. Implements
   :class:`collections.abc.Iterable` and
   :class:`collections.abc.Sized`.

   .. method:: update_cookies(cookies, response_url=None)

      Update cookies returned by server in ``Set-Cookie`` header.

      :param cookies: a :class:`collections.abc.Mapping`
         (e.g. :class:`dict`, :class:`~http.cookies.SimpleCookie`) or
         *iterable* of *pairs* with cookies returned by server's
         response.

      :param str response_url: URL of response, ``None`` for *shared
         cookies*.  Regular cookies are coupled with server's URL and
         are sent only to this server, shared ones are sent in every
         client request.

   .. method:: filter_cookies(request_url)

      Return jar's cookies acceptable for URL and available in
      ``Cookie`` header for sending client requests for given URL.

      :param str response_url: request's URL for which cookies are asked.

      :return: :class:`http.cookies.SimpleCookie` with filtered
         cookies for given URL.

   .. method:: clear(predicate=None)

      Removes all cookies from the jar if the predicate is ``None``. Otherwise remove only those :class:`~http.cookies.Morsel` that ``predicate(morsel)`` returns ``True``.

      :param predicate: callable that gets :class:`~http.cookies.Morsel` as a parameter and returns ``True`` if this :class:`~http.cookies.Morsel` must be deleted from the jar.

          .. versionadded:: 3.8

   .. method:: clear_domain(domain)

      Remove all cookies from the jar that belongs to the specified domain or its subdomains.

      :param str domain: domain for which cookies must be deleted from the jar.

      .. versionadded:: 3.8

Abstract Access Logger
-------------------------------

.. class:: AbstractAccessLogger

   An abstract class, base for all :class:`aiohttp.web.RequestHandler`
   ``access_logger`` implementations

   Method ``log`` should be overridden.

   .. method:: log(request, response, time)

      :param request: :class:`aiohttp.web.Request` object.

      :param response: :class:`aiohttp.web.Response` object.

      :param float time: Time taken to serve the request.


Abstract Resolver
-------------------------------

.. class:: AbstractResolver

   An abstract class, base for all resolver implementations.

   Method ``resolve`` should be overridden.

   .. method:: resolve(host, port, family)

      Resolve host name to IP address.

      :param str host: host name to resolve.

      :param int port: port number.

      :param int family: socket family.

      :return: list of :class:`aiohttp.abc.ResolveResult` instances.

   .. method:: close()

      Release resolver.

.. class:: ResolveResult

   Result of host name resolution.

   .. attribute:: hostname

      The host name that was provided.

   .. attribute:: host

      The IP address that was resolved.

   .. attribute:: port

      The port that was resolved.

   .. attribute:: family

      The address family that was resolved.

   .. attribute:: proto

      The protocol that was resolved.

   .. attribute:: flags

      The flags that were resolved.

Commit message:

Improve performance of the access logger when its disabled (#9822)
(cherry picked from commit 249df6e1599db75a94dc95f63c498545358f6ef8)

docs/abc.rst, after:

.. _aiohttp-abc:

Abstract Base Classes
=====================

.. module:: aiohttp.abc

Abstract routing
----------------

aiohttp has abstract classes for managing web interfaces.

The most part of :mod:`aiohttp.web` is not intended to be inherited
but few of them are.

aiohttp.web is built on top of few concepts: *application*, *router*,
*request* and *response*.

*router* is a *pluggable* part: a library user may build a *router*
from scratch, all other parts should work with new router seamlessly.

:class:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractRouter` has the only mandatory method:
:meth:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractRouter.resolve` coroutine. It must return an
:class:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo` instance.

If the requested URL handler is found
:meth:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo.handler` is a :term:`web-handler` for
requested URL and :attr:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo.http_exception` is ``None``.

Otherwise :attr:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo.http_exception` is an instance of
:exc:`~aiohttp.web.HTTPException` like *404: NotFound* or *405: Method
Not Allowed*. :meth:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo.handler` raises
:attr:`~aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo.http_exception` on call.


.. class:: AbstractRouter

   Abstract router, :class:`aiohttp.web.Application` accepts it as
   *router* parameter and returns as
   :attr:`aiohttp.web.Application.router`.

   .. method:: resolve(request)
      :async:

      Performs URL resolving. It's an abstract method, should be
      overridden in *router* implementation.

      :param request: :class:`aiohttp.web.Request` instance for
                      resolving, the request has
                      :attr:`aiohttp.web.Request.match_info` equals to
                      ``None`` at resolving stage.

      :return: :class:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractMatchInfo` instance.


.. class:: AbstractMatchInfo

   Abstract *match info*, returned by :meth:`aiohttp.abc.AbstractRouter.resolve` call.

   .. attribute:: http_exception

      :exc:`aiohttp.web.HTTPException` if no match was found, ``None``
      otherwise.

   .. method:: handler(request)
      :async:

      Abstract method performing :term:`web-handler` processing.

      :param request: :class:`aiohttp.web.Request` instance for
                      resolving, the request has
                      :attr:`aiohttp.web.Request.match_info` equals to
                      ``None`` at resolving stage.
      :return: :class:`aiohttp.web.StreamResponse` or descendants.

      :raise: :class:`aiohttp.web.HTTPException` on error

   .. method:: expect_handler(request)
      :async:

      Abstract method for handling *100-continue* processing.


Abstract Class Based Views
--------------------------

For *class based view* support aiohttp has abstract
:class:`AbstractView` class which is *awaitable* (may be uses like
``await Cls()`` or ``yield from Cls()`` and has a *request* as an
attribute.

.. class:: AbstractView

   An abstract class, base for all *class based views* implementations.

   Methods ``__iter__`` and ``__await__`` should be overridden.

   .. attribute:: request

      :class:`aiohttp.web.Request` instance for performing the request.


Abstract Cookie Jar
-------------------

.. class:: AbstractCookieJar

   The cookie jar instance is available as :attr:`aiohttp.ClientSession.cookie_jar`.

   The jar contains :class:`~http.cookies.Morsel` items for storing
   internal cookie data.

   API provides a count of saved cookies::

       len(session.cookie_jar)

   These cookies may be iterated over::

       for cookie in session.cookie_jar:
           print(cookie.key)
           print(cookie["domain"])

   An abstract class for cookie storage. Implements
   :class:`collections.abc.Iterable` and
   :class:`collections.abc.Sized`.

   .. method:: update_cookies(cookies, response_url=None)

      Update cookies returned by server in ``Set-Cookie`` header.

      :param cookies: a :class:`collections.abc.Mapping`
         (e.g. :class:`dict`, :class:`~http.cookies.SimpleCookie`) or
         *iterable* of *pairs* with cookies returned by server's
         response.

      :param str response_url: URL of response, ``None`` for *shared
         cookies*.  Regular cookies are coupled with server's URL and
         are sent only to this server, shared ones are sent in every
         client request.

   .. method:: filter_cookies(request_url)

      Return jar's cookies acceptable for URL and available in
      ``Cookie`` header for sending client requests for given URL.

      :param str response_url: request's URL for which cookies are asked.

      :return: :class:`http.cookies.SimpleCookie` with filtered
         cookies for given URL.

   .. method:: clear(predicate=None)

      Removes all cookies from the jar if the predicate is ``None``. Otherwise remove only those :class:`~http.cookies.Morsel` that ``predicate(morsel)`` returns ``True``.

      :param predicate: callable that gets :class:`~http.cookies.Morsel` as a parameter and returns ``True`` if this :class:`~http.cookies.Morsel` must be deleted from the jar.

          .. versionadded:: 3.8

   .. method:: clear_domain(domain)

      Remove all cookies from the jar that belongs to the specified domain or its subdomains.

      :param str domain: domain for which cookies must be deleted from the jar.

      .. versionadded:: 3.8

Abstract Access Logger
-------------------------------

.. class:: AbstractAccessLogger

   An abstract class, base for all :class:`aiohttp.web.RequestHandler`
   ``access_logger`` implementations

   Method ``log`` should be overridden.

   .. method:: log(request, response, time)

      :param request: :class:`aiohttp.web.Request` object.

      :param response: :class:`aiohttp.web.Response` object.

      :param float time: Time taken to serve the request.

   .. attribute:: enabled

        Return True if logger is enabled.

        Override this property if logging is disabled to avoid the
        overhead of calculating details to feed the logger.

        This property may be omitted if logging is always enabled.


Abstract Resolver
-------------------------------

.. class:: AbstractResolver

   An abstract class, base for all resolver implementations.

   Method ``resolve`` should be overridden.

   .. method:: resolve(host, port, family)

      Resolve host name to IP address.

      :param str host: host name to resolve.

      :param int port: port number.

      :param int family: socket family.

      :return: list of :class:`aiohttp.abc.ResolveResult` instances.

   .. method:: close()

      Release resolver.

.. class:: ResolveResult

   Result of host name resolution.

   .. attribute:: hostname

      The host name that was provided.

   .. attribute:: host

      The IP address that was resolved.

   .. attribute:: port

      The port that was resolved.

   .. attribute:: family

      The address family that was resolved.

   .. attribute:: proto

      The protocol that was resolved.

   .. attribute:: flags

      The flags that were resolved.
